hi my name is adina and i'm from the
institute of neuroscience and medicine
at the research center you live in
germany
this is the debian in arts and science
track and i will present the software
tool called dataled from the perspective
of the scientist and i will also talk
about how principles
that come from software distributions
are used and applied for data and
scientific workflows
to enable the decentralized management
of digital objects with this tool
i want to start with acknowledgments i'm
the
lead of the documentation project of
this tool but
i'm representing many people that are
building and documenting the software
today
i also want to thank our funders as well
as our collaborators right here next to
me on the slide
i'm starting this talk from the
perspective of a scientist
and therefore i want to start by telling
you a bit about the work environment
that i have and about some of the
difficulties
that we still face as a neuroscientist
i'm very lucky that there's a growing
culture of open data and data sharing
i can have access to hundreds of
terabytes of data from various databases
and i can analyze and visualize all of
this data
with many open source software tools and
packages
if i then want to share my work and do
open science
i have a large ecosystem of services for
storage for hosting for collaboration to
choose from
and i can work on a daily basis on
really interesting questions
and with really fascinating data for
example patient data
now why all of that is truly fantastic
there are also some difficulties left so
for example in order to get the open
data that i talked about
or share my own data i have to navigate
through vastly heterogeneous data
distribution routines depending on the
databases that i choose
updating data be that from an open data
source or if i'm updating my own data
for others
is equally heterogeneous and oftentimes
also quite awkward
and all of this is elevated by the fact
that scientists
aren't usually trained in data
management so while we can get
or share terabytes of data we aren't
necessarily the
most skilled in handling this data
particularly efficient
or in a way that aids the
discoverability transparency
or visibility of our work especially
when it comes to
patient data sharing or retrieving is a
problem
because this data is subject to very
strict data protection so it righteously
falls under general data protection
regulation gdpr and
many times simply cannot be shared at
the same time this data is also
incredibly sparse
and this is a problem especially for
fields that need to aggregate large
amounts of data
to draw meaningful statistical
inferences
it's objectively fantastic to have open
source tools for data analysis
and the broad range of methods that they
bring with them
but we are also aware as a field that
the reproducibility of our results are
still threatened
because the analysis that we do with
these tools are in many cases
complex in transparent difficult to
understand and recreate
and even if people share their code and
it's completely understandable
results may still not reproduce because
different versions of the same software
produce different results with regard to
collaboration
it's great to have that many services
and tools available but what's the
problem
is that there are only a few workflows
that are interoperable
across institutes or even within the
same institute so one
scientist may use the open science
framework to share their data another
one uses g
drive another one hands out usb sticks
and someone who may be more elaborate
shares their code on github
with their data and git lfs but this all
works nicely individually
and yet is a pain once it gets to
collaboration
now in these peculiar forms these
difficulties surface in science
but there are underlying principles in
these difficulties that generalize
beyond science and for example also
surface
or surfaced in software meaning
distribution
updating management interoperability
reproducibility and so forth
so my question or the question that i'm
asking is
what can we learn for scientific
workflows from software
or to rephrase the question how can we
improve scientific workflows
when we come from the perspective of
software distributions like debian
instead of from a scientific perspective
and this is the story where dataled
and this is the part in my talk where i
will switch from my perspective as a
scientist
into a bit of a storytelling mode to
tell you what happened
before i joined this project and how it
came to be
datalite was created with the idea to
share and treat data like software
the people who conceived the idea for
the software were yaric and michael
they are debian developers and some
years back
they had created the neurodebian
repository neurodebian is a debian pure
blend specifically
for neuroscientific software and while
they were busy
packaging up neural imaging software
they realized that there was a need
to distribute data alongside the
software oftentimes large data and
oftentimes
changing data they found out quite
quickly
that it doesn't scale to add large and
changing files into the dev files
and they were searching essentially for
a way to make
data a first class citizen just a
software is
in order to distribute it alongside with
the software
that needed that data at about the same
time
joey hess famous debian developer
was working on his software git nx which
is a distributed car synchronization
system hid nx allows to manage and
version control files with git
without checking file contents into kit
and it allows
to hook into a large range of storage
solutions or storage providers
to then transfer these file contents
between repositories
and for jarg and michael get annex
seemed to be the solution for the
problem
so initially they wrote dataland as a
wrapper around git and getannex to
provide easy means to package updater
and distributed it and ever since they
had been working
with joey and contributed also back to
gitanex
but over the years they and all of the
people who joined them in this project
realized that beyond being a wrapper for
packaging up and distributing data
data light can also have other powerful
features specifically
those that are tuned to the use cases of
open transparent and reproducible
science
so many years after these initial
thoughts about the necessity to version
control data
and distributed just like software
datalit has grown into a tool that's
widely adopted and used for much more
than just data sharing
and here's where i get back into my
perspective as a scientist
and i'm going to talk about data let
today as a tool
for the joint management of all digital
objects through their entire life cycle
and i want to focus on how datalet helps
with the difficulties that i outlined in
the beginning
from my perspective as a scientist for
this i'm focusing on a few core features
version control transport logistics
interoperability and provenance capture
but here's a quick overview of the
basics at first
mit licensed open source software it has
a python api it's
also comes with a command line client
it's obviously available in debian
and it is built on top of two version
control tools the first is git which
should be well known
and get annex which i briefly introduced
and is developed by joey hess
because version control is the
foundation of dataled i start with this
feature
datalite knows exactly two things data
sets and
files this means i can create a data set
clone a data set
as a directory on my computer and then
include files into these directories
and add them to dataled for version
control and management
now a data set is a git repository so
just like it
it is completely content and domain
agnostic there are no special custom
procedures or data structures that users
have to comply to
and it is built for uncompromised
decentralization
to dive a little bit more into the
version control features i'm bringing up
this figure again
and this figure depicts how files and
datasets are saved
it all works with a single command data
let's save
this command works regardless of the
file
and this is the point wicked annex comes
into play
data sets can have an optional annex in
which file contents are stored
in principle any type of file can go
into the annex be
that large files small files text files
binary files
whatever but it's specifically useful
for large and sensitive data
when git nx handles a file instead of
checking the file contents into git
which would suffer especially if it's
large frequent content yet annex
checks only content identity hashes and
location information about the file that
you get
gitanix then manages the file content
inside of the annex
and it also manages the transport from
into the nx
this allows for completely decentralized
version control
for data of any size inside of a data
dataset
the first little addition that git and
git
annex the data light provides to get in
get annex
is already seen here in this data led
save command
and that is a non-complex core api
around git and kit annex this is done to
make
git and git nx work flows more
simplistic and thus usable for data
management
novices in this case here local version
control has just boiled down to exactly
two commands
creating a data set and then saving
files inside of it
nevertheless a data set is an unimpaired
gitgidents repository
so the flexibility and all commands of
git and gitanix are preserved
and users are free to use them if they
wish to
another feature that datalite adds to
git and git annex
is a seamless nesting mechanism
this mechanism enables users to create
nested hierarchies of data sets that can
be arbitrarily deep and are organized
in a super sub data set relationship
this mechanism is based on github
modules and it is
becoming but is becoming faster than
submodules
and it is importantly also more seamless
than github modules
a hierarchy of datasets as the one
depicted above
feels like a mono repository because
every command can be applied recursively
throughout the complete hierarchy
if you want to and this has two
advantages
the first is that it overcomes scaling
issues that would arise if too many
files are placed into a single git
repository
with these nesting mechanisms files can
be distributed
into different repositories and yet
seamlessly linked
and yeah so here's an example
for one dataset one of the largest that
we manage you can get it from github if
you're interested
that contains quite a number of sub data
sets
but i'm doing a recursive status query
from the topmost
data set down this hierarchy and that
works fine and what you can see here as
well in the output of this data
status query is that this data set uh
holds more than 15 million files
uh almost 80 terabytes of data and that
works just fine so that's a mechanism
that scales really quite well the second
advantage is
that this nesting approach modularizes
research projects
as uh outlined in this graphics so we
have reusable standalone components in
the form of data sets
that are quite transparent and can be
reused very flexibly
into other projects in the case above
for example
the raw data data set or the
pre-processed data data set
can simply be reused in yet another
analysis project
and this makes everything understandable
flexible reusable and more transparent
as for data transport thanks to git and
cadence data sets
regardless of what they contain can
indeed now be shared just like source
code
they can be cloned pushed updated to and
from local path remote hosting services
or external special remotes for file
storage
and this leads to a really easy and
generic procedure
for data publication for data updating
for data consumption collaboration
or data management so all of the open
data that i've talked about
i personally now only consume with data
led
all with the same generic workflows
regardless of where the data is actually
coming from
and data access management
remains completely flexible in the
transport logistics
of all of these tools it remains also
fully in the hands of the user
because the user can flexibly decide who
gets access
to their data based on the storage
location
that they can pick for their data sets
something that is particularly useful in
transport logistics
is get annexes separation of file
content and file location and identity
tracking
because this allows disk space or where
computing workflows for storage
workflows
cloning a data set from a local or
remote location
only retrieves the git aspect of the
data set and not the nx file contents
this is thus a really fast operation and
the resulting data set
is really lean so clone data sets as you
can see here
are typically only a fraction of the
total size of their content
but because the location information is
kept in git
even though the contents are stored in
the annex all
annexed files can still be browsed so
that i have an overview of what
is inside my data set what do i have
access to
our required file content can then be
retrieved on demand
uh with the data get call or the
respective git annex call
but they can also be dropped if they
aren't needed anymore to free up disk
space again
and that's a mechanism that is very very
helpful because it allows me to clone
this 80 terabyte
data set explore what is inside it get
flexibly
whatever i need in my particular
analysis
and all of that on a computer that has
far less disk space than 80 terabytes
for interoperability data that is built
to maximize it to maximize
interoperability
and use with any third party
infrastructure
so i've shown you this image here of
this ecosystem of third-party providers
and what datalab does is providing a
common interface
to provide the same generic workflows to
work with each of these
third-party providers so to give users a
choice
or the freedom to pick whatever
third-party provider they like or have
been using ever since
but to harmonize the workflows across
the third party
providers the last thing i want to talk
about
is provenance provenance is
information on how a file came to be or
how it came to be
in its current state and
this information is the basis for
reproducibility
because it allows us to identify how a
file was created
dataled has means to record such
provenance and it can thus
track the entire evolution and lineage
of files in a dataset and this allows me
to later answer questions like how did
this file come to be
or what steps were undertaken to
transform the raw data into the
published results
an incredibly useful question to have an
answer for in science
the way this works is by wrapping up the
execution
of arbitrary commands and associating
that with any changes
that this produces in the data set and
optionally
also specifications of input and so
forth
the resulting provenance is then stored
as a git commit
in the dataset history and each files
that is produced
by a specific operation is then
associated with the command script or
data that it originated from
here's an example of basic provenance
capture and i'm going to move myself
across the slide a bit to show you what
i mean so what you can see here
right right here is the execution of
a batch script quite simple this batch
script is not
executed on its own however it is
wrapped inside of this data let run
command
the data let run command takes a human
readable commit message that i can
provide if i want to
and i can optionally also provide input
and output specifications
and then it executes the bash script
given to it and records
all of the changes that occur due to the
execution of the script
it then saves the resulting files in
this case
you can see them right here down there
and associates them
with the script and the way the script
was executed and the data it was
computed from
and all of this from about here
is the git commit that this is start
under this is
a simple git commit that associates all
of this provenance
inside the single commit message and
importantly it does so
in a way that is also machine readable
before i
talk more about the machine readable
aspect of this
i'm going to take providence capture a
little bit further
and show you how not only basic problems
can be captured with data led but also
the complete
provenance including computational
provenance or software environments
because datasets can
have any types of files or can manage
any types of files
they can also track software
environments in the form of software
containers so i can
attach a software container into
a data set and then have a slightly
different wrapper not data led run but
data that containers run
that executes the commands or scripts
given to it
inside of the software container and
attaches the software environment
as additional provenance to the record
it generates
now this information is already quite
neat it's cool to have the information
readily available in the history of
my data set so that i can query any file
how it came to be
but beyond this any recorded
transformation
can also be recomputed and this is done
by identifying a specific commit for
example via commit message
and then giving it to a specific command
that can re-execute
this recorded transformation and this
makes reproducibility
a matter of simply identifying a commit
the recomputed contents are
automatically verified to be
exactly reproduced or not because
their identity hash can be compared with
previously computed content
and this method is also
a useful alternative to the storage or
transport of the data so instead of
transfer
transferring large amounts of results
around i can simply share
a re-executable machine readable record
of how a result came to be
now beyond these score features datalat
has many more functions
one i want to briefly mention are the
datalet's metadata logistics
because especially for science it is
relevant to
find files to discover files to search
to search data
and datasets can generate store share
and search
arbitrary metadata in datasets and also
across dataset boundaries or hierarchies
this enables workflows in which only
dataset metadata is either
shared or only retrieved
and thus enables data discovery that
does not require retrieving file
contents or even
the sub data sets that the metadata is
from
and one thing that this is useful form
is
for an approach to dealing with
sensitive data
because while file contents
that fall under gdpr can be kept private
thanks to the transport logistics
one could share only an anonymized
metadata
that is not subject to any privacy
concerns and
those metadata can be used to for
example
provide uh material for queries for
general aspects that can be shared like
a court associate associations of
patients are aged groups and so forth
and it can also be used to share
anonymized file structures
uh directory trees and so forth to give
scientists that cannot obtain the data
the chance to develop code against the
file structure
then submit the code to the institution
that holds the private data and have
the results computed there the results
can be anonymized and transferred back
so no breach of privacy happens and
this is thus a viable solution to bring
the computation to the data
instead of the other way around and then
there's still more
which i can only briefly mention such as
a rear storm this is a file system based
storage system for data sets
tuned for maintainability and especially
helpful
on systems with inode limitations
there are many data that extensions with
additional functionality that are domain
specific
but data that is also highly extensible
for your specific use case and we have
templates that can help you achieve it
and there is a large open data
collection that datalit
maintains with at the moment more than
250 terabytes
of data that is freely available
now to sum up by um
coming from the perspective and the
needs of software distribution
dataled has provided means for
decentralized and simplified data
management
and this is useful for open transparent
interpreter super science
specifically data can be consumed
version shared and updated just like
source code
simpler data management and disk space
aware storage and computing
helps especially novices deal with large
amounts of data
with the joint management of code data
software execution
and all of the provenance science can
become more transparent and reproducible
and with generic workflows and
interoperability science can also
become more collaborative if you're
interested
in finding out more then i can recommend
that you take a look at the day-to-day
handbook it's extensive
user documentation for various types of
consumers we have high level function
overviews and cheat sheets but we also
have narrative based
tutorials code along courses and step by
step instructions
for common data management problems and
you could learn how to write a
reproducible paper for example
if you want to get in touch then you can
find us on github
our technical docs are online and we
have a youtube channel in which you can
find much
more tutorials and
talks and we have a matrix channel that
you can go to to chat with us
if you are interested in obtaining these
slides they can be found on github as
well
with that i want to thank you for your
attention i'm looking forward
to the questions in the qa session and i
hope that you stay safe
and healthy